HEARD ARGUMENTS OVER CAMPAIGN
FINANCE TODAY, IN THE BIGGEST
CASE INVOLVING POLITICAL
DONATIONS SINCE "CITIZENS
UNITED" THREE YEARS AGO.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS OFF TONIGHT.
ALSO AHEAD, AN EXCLUSIVE
INTERVIEW WITH WHITE HOUSE
COUNTERTERRORISM ADVISER LISA
MONACO, ON THE HEELS OF THE
WEEKEND RAIDS IN LIBYA AND
SOMALIA.
AND FROM NEW YORK CITY:
>> I WANT TO MAKE THE NEW
FACEBOOK, AND THAT'S WHAT I'M
GOING TO DO.
>> Woodruff: A PROFILE OF A
PROGRAM TRAINING TODAY'S HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS TO BECOME
TOMORROW'S TECH ENTREPRENEURS.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: OUR LEAD STORY
TONIGHT: ACCUSATIONS AGAIN FLEW
UP AND DOWN PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE
ON THE EIGHTH DAY OF THE PARTIAL
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
PRESIDENT OBAMA DID RAISE THE
PROSPECT OF A SHORT-TERM
SOLUTION TO ADDRESS THAT AND THE
COMING DEBT LIMIT, BUT
REPUBLICANS WEREN'T BUYING.
NEWSHOUR CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN HAS
OUR REPORT.
>> I WILL SIT DOWN AND WORK WITH
ANY ONE OF ANY PARTY.
>> Holman: PRESIDENT OBAMA CAME
TO THE WHITE HOUSE BRIEFING ROOM
THIS AFTERNOON TO REBUT
REPUBLICAN CRITICISM THAT HE'S
REFUSED TO NEGOTIATE.
>> I'VE SHOWN MYSELF WILLING TO
GO MORE THAN HALFWAY IN THESE
CONVERSATIONS.
AND IF REASONABLE REPUBLICANS
WANT TO TALK ABOUT THESE THING
AGAIN, I'M READY TO HEAD UP TO
THE HILL AND TRY.
I'LL EVEN SPRING FOR DINNER
AGAIN.
BUT I'M NOT GOING TO DO IT UNTIL
THE MORE EXTREME PARTS OF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY STOP FORCING
JOHN BOEHNER TO ISSUE THREATS
ABOUT OUR ECONOMY.
>> Holman: IN FACT, THE
PRESIDENT SAID, HE'S EVEN
WILLING TO DISCUSS CHANGES IN
THE HEALTH CARE ACT AFTER
REPUBLICANS AGREE TO REOPEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND RAISE THE
NATIONAL DEBT CEILING.
HE AND HOUSE SPEAKER BOEHNER DID
GET TOGETHER BY PHONE THIS
MORNING BUT REPORTEDLY MOSTLY
EXCHANGED TALKING POINTS.
SHORTLY AFTER MR. OBAMA SPOKE
THIS AFTERNOON, BOEHNER CAME
BEFORE THE CAMERAS WITH HIS
ANSWER: THE PRESIDENT'S POSITION
HE SAID, IS UNSUSTAINABLE.
>> THE LONG AND SHORT OF IT IS
THERE'S GOING TO BE A
NEGOTIATION HERE.
WE CAN'T RAISE THE DEBT CEILING
WITHOUT DOING SOMETHING ABOUT
WHAT'S DRIVING US TO BORROW MORE
MONEY AND TO LIVE BEYOND OUR
MEANS.
THE IDEA THAT WE SHOULD CONTINUE
TO SPEND MONEY THAT WE DON'T
HAVE AND GIVE THE BILL TO OUR
KIDS AND OUR GRAND KIDS WOULD BE
WRONG.
WHAT THE PRESIDENT SAID TODAY
WAS IF THERE'S UNCONDITIONAL
SURRENDER BY REPUBLICANS HE'LL
SIT DOWN AND TALK TO US.
THAT'S NOT THE WAY OUR
GOVERNMENT WORKS.
>> Holman: MEANWHILE, HOUSE
REPUBLICANS SAY THEY'LL CALL FOR
A SPECIAL BIPARTISAN COMMITTEE
WORK OUT FISCAL ISSUES AND END
THE IMPASSE.
A SIMILAR GROUP IN 2011 TRIED
AND FAILED TO REACH AN AGREEMENT
ON DEFICIT REDUCTION AND THE
PRESIDENT TODAY REJECTED TRYING
THAT AGAIN.
>> A QUORUM IS PRESENT.
>> Holman: AND OVER IN THE
SENATE, DEMOCRATS MADE PLANS TO
OFFER A STRAIGHT-UP BILL RAISING
THE DEBT CEILING.
IT FACED A LIKELY REPUBLICAN
FILIBUSTER.
>> Woodruff: THE IMPASSE IN
WASHINGTON DID A NUMBER ON THE
STOCK MARKET AGAIN TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
DROPPED ANOTHER 159 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 14,776.
THE NASDAQ FELL 75 POINTS TO
CLOSE BELOW 3695.
IN OTHER NEWS, THE SUPREME COURT
TOOK ON A MAJOR NEW CASE ON
CAMPAIGN FINANCING.
ARGUMENTS FOCUSED ON WHETHER TO
THROW OUT THE LIMITS ON
CONTRIBUTIONS BY INDIVIDUALS.
IN 2010, THE HIGH COURT THREW
OUT LIMITS ON INDEPENDENT
SPENDING BY CORPORATIONS AND
LABOR UNIONS.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THIS STORY,
RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S NEW
HEALTH INSURANCE WEB SITE HAD TO
BE TAKEN DOWN AGAIN OVERNIGHT,
ONE WEEK AFTER IT WENT LIVE.
GLITCHES HAVE PLAGUED THE ONLINE
ENROLLMENT SYSTEM FOR UNINSURED
AMERICANS.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS
DECLINED TO RELEASE ANY NUMBERS
ON HOW MANY PEOPLE HAVE MANAGED
TO SIGN UP.
THERE WAS WORD TODAY THAT POWER
SURGES HAVE REPEATEDLY DAMAGED A
MASSIVE NEW DATA STORAGE
FACILITY FOR THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY.
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTED TEN MELTDOWNS OVER 13
MONTHS DESTROYED HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS OF HARDWARE
AT THE UTAH SITE.
THE POWER PROBLEMS HAVE DELAYED
THE FACILITY'S OPENING.
THE U.S. COMMANDO RAID THAT
SEIZED A TOP AL-QAEDA SUSPECT IN
LIBYA IS STILL MAKING WAVES.
LIBYAN JIHADISTS VOWED TODAY TO
KIDNAP AMERICANS IN RETALIATION
FOR THE CAPTURE OF ABU ANAS AL-
LIBY.
AND THE U.S. MILITARY SAID IT'S
MOVING SOME 20MARI0 NES TO A
BASE IN ITALY, JUST IN CASE.
IN WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OBAMA
SAID THE LIBYA RAID-- AND
ANOTHER IN SOMALIA-- DOES NOT
MEAN HE'S EXPANDING THE WAR ON
TERROR.
>> THERE'S A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
US GOING AFTER TERRORISTS WHO
ARE PLOTTING DIRECTLY TO DO
DAMAGE TO THE UNITED STATES AND
US BEING INVOLVED IN WARS.
BUT WHERE YOU'VE GOT ACTIVE PLOT
AND ACTIVE NETWORKS, WE'RE GOING
TO GO AFTER THEM.
>> Woodruff: THE PRESIDENT DID
NOT DIRECTLY ADDRESS A QUESTION
ON WHETHER THE SEIZURE OF AL-
LIBY COMPLIED WITH INTERNATIONAL
LAW.
MORE ON ALL THIS, LATER.
IN EGYPT, THE ARMY CHIEF CHARGED
THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD WITH
HAVING THREATENED VIOLENCE IN A
BID TO FORESTALL ANY MOVE
AGAINST FORMER ISLAMIST
PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI.
GENERAL ABDEL-FATTAH EL-SISSI
LED THE OUSTER OF MORSI LAST
JULY.
HE SAID TODAY MORSI SHOULD HAVE
RESIGNED IN THE FACE OF SWEEPING
PROTESTS AGAINST HIS RULE.
MEANWHILE, THE DEATH TOLL FROM
SUNDAY CLASHES BETWEEN THE ARMY
AND MORSI SUPPORTERS ROSE TO 57.
THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT TODAY
LIFTED A BAN ON WOMEN IN STATE
INSTITUTIONS WEARING ISLAMIC
HEAD SCARVES.
THE RESTRICTION DATES BACK
ALMOST 90 YEARS AND HAS KEPT
MANY WOMEN OUT OF GOVERNMENT
JOBS.
THE NEW RULES WILL NOT APPLY TO
THE COURTS OR THE MILITARY.
THE PRESIDENT OF ARGENTINA IS
RECOVERING FROM SKULL SURGERY IN
BUENOS AIRES.
CRISTINA FERNANDEZ HAD THE
OPERATION TODAY TO REMOVE A
BLOOD CLOT AND RELIEVE PRESSURE
ON HER BRAIN AFTER AN
UNSPECIFIED HEAD INJURY.
SUPPORTERS KEPT VIGIL OUTSIDE
HER HOSPITAL AND BROUGHT SIGNS
WISHING THE 60-YEAR-OLD LEADER
WELL.
>> ( translated ): I'M WORRIED.
SHE IS SOMEONE WHO'S VERY
INTELLIGENT AND HAVING TO HAVE
AN OPERATION, REGARDLESS OF HOWo
RISK.
I'M VERY WORRIED THERE WON'T BE
SOMEONE ABLE TO REPLACE HER
ADEQUATELY.
>> Woodruff: A SPOKESMAN FOR
PRESIDENT FERNANDEZ EMERGED
LATER TO SAY, "THE OPERATION
WENT WELL."
THE SURGERY CAN REQUIRE SEVERAL
MONTHS OF RECOVERY TIME.
A NOBEL PRIZE WILL GO TO TWO MEN
WHO MADE A DISCOVERY THAT
UNDERPINS ALL OF MODERN PHYSICS.
WE HAVE A REPORT ON TODAY'S
ANNOUNCEMENT FROM LAWRENCE
McGINTY OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
>> Reporter: IT'S TAKEN ALMOST
50 YEARS BUT TODAY THE NOBEL
PRIZE FOR PHYSICS FINALLY WENT
TO ONE OF SCIENCES MOST ORIGINAL
THINKERS.i
>> PROFESSOR PETER HIGGS, UNITED
KINGDOM.
>> IT WAS 1964 WHEN HE
DISCOVERED A SUBATOMIC PARTICLE
NOW CALLED THE HIGGS BOSON.
BUT ONLY IN JULY LAST YEAR DID
SCIENTISTS MANAGE TO MAKE THE
SO-CALLED GOD PARTICLE AND SO
PROVE IT EXISTED.
THE VINDICATION OF HIS THEORY 50
YEARS AGO BROUGHT A TEAR TO HIS
EYE.
DAYS AFTER THAT, HE WAS ASKED IF
HE MIGHT WIN THE NOBEL PRIZE.
>> I DON'T KNOW.
I DON'T HAVE CLOSE FRIENDS ON
THE NOBEL COMMITTEE.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Reporter: HE'D BE THE FIRST
TO GIVE CREDIT TO THE SCIENTISTS
AT THE WORLD'S BIGGEST AT TOM
SMASHER AT CERTAIN NEAR GENEVA
WHOSE EXPERIMENTS FOUND THE
PARTICLE HE PREDICTED ALL THOSE
YEARS AGO.
PETER HIGGS AND FRAN WAUGH
ENGLERT WILL BE RECEIVING THE
MEDAL IN ABOUT TWO MONTHS TIME.
BUT IT'S A BIG STRANGE THAT THE
THOUSANDS OF SCIENTISTS AT CERNE
WHO PROVED THAT THE PARTICLE
THEY PREDICTED ACTUALLY EXISTED
WILL GET NO RECOGNITION OF AT
ALL FROM THE NOBEL COMMITTEE.
THAT'S BECAUSE THIS MEDAL CAN
ONLY GO TO INDIVIDUAL
INDIVIDUALS.
AFTER ALL THE PUBLICITY LAST
YEAR, TODAY HE WAS SHY OF THE
CAMERAS.
>> HE'S ALWAYS BEEN RATHER
MODEST AND ACTUALLY LOOKS TO
GIVE OTHER PEOPLE CREDIT WHERE
APPROPRIATE.
>> Reporter: A MODEST MAN WITH A
BIG IDEA THAT IS NOW THE BEDROCK
OF MODERN PHYSICS
>> Woodruff: THE REVAMPED, MORE
COLORFUL AMERICAN $100 BILL WENT
INTO CIRCULATION TODAY.
NEW SECURITY FEATURES INCLUDE A
BLUE THREE-DIMENSIONAL RIBBON TO
THE LEFT OF THE IMAGE OF
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN'S FACE.
THERE'S ALSO A COPPER-COLORED
INKWELL.
THE HUNDRED-DOLLAR BILL IS THE
MOST FREQUENTLY COUNTERFEITED
U.S. CURRENCY OVERSEAS.
HERE AT HOME, THE $20 DOLLAR
BILL IS THE COUNTERFEITERS'
CHOICE.
STILL AHEAD ON THE NEWSHOUR, THE
SUPREME COURT WEIGHS LIMITS TO
INDIVIDUALS' POLITICAL
DONATIONS; THE SHUTDOWN'S IMPACT
ON A COLORADO TOWN ALREADY
REELING FROM DEVASTATING FLOODS;
A WHITE HOUSE COUNTER-TERRORISM
ADVISER ON THE RECENT RAIDS IN
AFRICA; TEACHING TODAY'S KIDS TO
BE TOMORROW'S TECH TITANS; AND
PRO FOOTBALL'S STRUGGLE WITH
HEAD INJURIES.
>> Woodruff: THE SUPREME COURT
KICKED OFF ITS NEW TERM BY
HEARING ARGUMENTS IN WHAT COULD
BE THE MOST IMPORTANT CASE OF
THE JUDICIAL YEAR.
AT ISSUE: WHETHER TO LIFT THE
CAP ON TOTAL DONATIONS ONE
INDIVIDUAL CAN MAKE TO
POLITICIANS DURING AN ELECTION
CYCLE.
HERE TO WALK US THROUGH THE
ARGUMENTS IS MARCIA COYLE OF THE
"NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL."
SHE WAS IN THE COURTROOM TODAY.
.rri
IT'S GOOD TO HAVE YOU WITH US.
>> GOOD TO BE BACK, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: ANOTHER TERM UNDER
WAY.
>> ANOTHER BIG CASE.
>> Woodruff: SO BEFORE WE TALK
ABOUT THIS CASE, MARCIA, IT'S
IMPORTANT TO HAVE YOU DEFINE
WHAT -- DEFINE WHAT LIMITS WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT KINDS OF
LIMITS WHEN IT COMES TO
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
>> WELL, OUR FEDERAL LAW
CONTAINS TWO TYPES OF LIMITS ON
CONTRIBUTIONS BY INDIVIDUALS TO
CANDIDATES, POLITICAL PARTIES,
AND POLITICAL COMMITTEES.
THERE ARE BASE LIMIT WHICH IS
RESTRICT THE AMOUNT THAT AN
INDIVIDUAL CAN GIVE IN AN -- IN
A SINGLE ELECTION YEAR AND THEN
THERE ARE WHAT WE CALLING A A
GATT LIMITS WHICH RESTRICT THE
AMOUNT, THE TOTAL AMOUNT, THAT
AN INDIVIDUAL CAN GIVE IN A
TWO-YEAR ELECTION CYCLE.
NOW, RIGHT NOW, THAT AGGREGATE
LIMIT IS ABOUT $123,000.
THE SUPREME COURT HAS UPHELD
BASE LIMITS AND AGGREGATE
LIMITS.
THEY DID IT IN 1976.
THEY ACKNOWLEDGED AT THAT TIME
THAT THIS WAS A BURDEN ON SPEECH
AND ASSOCIATION RIGHTS BUT THAT
BURDEN WAS OUTWEIGHED BY THE
GOVERNMEOV'S SUBSTANTIAL
INTEREST IN COMBATING CORRUPTION
QUID PRO QUO CORRUPTION AND THE
APPEARANCE OF CORRUPTION.
AND THE COURT HAS NOT ERODED
THOSE LIMITS IN THE INTERVENING
40 YEARS.
>> Woodruff: SO THE MAIN CASE
BEFORE THE COURT TODAY IS THISi
ALABAMA BUSINESSMAN WHO SAYS WE
NEED TO DO AWAY WITH THE TOTAL
LIMIT.
>> YES.
THE ALABAMA BUSINESSMAN AND THE
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE
AND ALSO PARTICIPATING IN
ARGUMENTS TODAY WAS A LAWYER FOR
SENATOR MITCHxD McCOME WHO HAS
BEEN A LONG TIME FOE OF CAMPAIG
FINANCE.
>> Woodruff: THE SENATE
REPUBLICAN LEADER.
>> RIGHT.
AND THEIR MAIN ARGUMENT IS SINCE
1976 THERE ARE MANY MORE
REGULATIONS ON THE BOOKS TO
PREVENT WHAT WAS THE MAIN
JUSTIFICATION BY CONGRESS FOR
THE AGGREGATE LIMITrS.
THE CONGRESSMEN POSED THEM, IT
ID,SA IN ORDER TO PREVENT
CIRCUMVENTION END RUNS AROUND
THE BASE LIMITS.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT WAS THE
ARGUMENT AND WHAT KINDS OF
QUESTIONS WERE YOU HEARING FROM
THE JUSTICES?
>> WELL, IT WAS INTERESTING,
JUDY, BECAUSE YOU COULD SEE ON
THE COURT ALMOST THE SAME TYPE
OF DIVIDE THAT WE SAW ON THE
COURT IN 2010 WITH THE CITIZENS
UNITED DECISION.
YOU HAD PRIMARILY JUSTICES ON
THE CONSERVATIVE SIDE OF THE
COURT-- JUSTICES SCALIA AND
ALITO-- REALLY SKEPTICAL OF
WHETHER LIFTING THE AGGREGATE
LIMITS WOULD PREVENT CORRUPTION
OR THE APPEARANCE OF CORRUPTION.
ON THE OTHER SIDE, OF COURSE,
THE GOVERNMENT WAS ARGUING THESE
LIMITS ARE STILL NEEDED TO
COMBAT CORRUPTION AND THE
APPEARANCE OF CORRUPTION BUT ON
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE BENCH, THE
MORE LIBERAL JUSTICES, THEY GAVE
MANY HYPOTHETICALS TESTING THAT
AND APPEARED TO BE INDICATING
THAT THEY DID BELIEVE IT WAS
POSSIBLE THAT WITHOUT THE
AGGREGATE LIMITS YOU COULD HAVE
AN INDIVIDUAL WRITING A CHECK
FOR APPROXIMATELY $3 MILLION,
GIVING IT TO A CANDIDATE AND OF
COURSE YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE A
SEAT AT THE TABLE IF YOU DO
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
>> Woodruff: AND SO WHAT -- AND
HOW WERE THE ATTORNEYS WHO WERE
REPRESENTING EACH SIDE?
HOW WERE THEY ANSWERING THIS?
>> WELL, THEY STUCK TO THEIR
ARGUMENT THAT, ONE, THERE'S NO
NEED TO WORRY ABOUT
CIRCUMVENTION OF THE BASE LIMITS
ANYMORE.
THAT WE W THE AGGREGATE LIMITS
YOU'RE BASICALLY -- YOU'RE
BURDENING MUCH MORE SPEECH THAN
IS NECESSARY AND THAT VIOLATES
THE FIRST AMENDMENT.
AND THE GOVERNMENT SAID BUT IF
YOU LIFT THESE LIMITS YOU'RE
GOING TO HAVE ROUGHLY MAYBE 500
OF THE HEALTHIEST AMERICANS
CONTROLLING THE ELECTIONS IN
THIS COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: AND HOW MUCH WERE
THE JUSTICES CONCERNED ABOUT
THAT?
>> I THINK THERE WAS CONCERN
PRIMARILY ON THE LIBERAL SIDE.
ALTHOUGH IT WAS VERY
INTERESTING.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, HE HASN'T
BEEN AS AGGRESSIVE AS OTHER
JUSTICES WHEN IT COMES TO
LIMITING MONEY IN CAMPAIGNS EVEN
THOUGH HE DID VOTE IN CITIZENS
UNITED TO LIFT THE LIMITS ON
SPENDING.
BUT HE VOICED CONCERN ABOUT WHAT
THESE AGGREGATE LIMITS DO TO THE
SMALLER DONORr WHO UNDER CURRET
LIMIT CANS BASICALLY GIVE TO9INL
OF THE LAW IF HE OR SHE GIVES TO
TEN CANDIDATES.
SO HE SAW THIS AS SEVERE
RESTRICTION ON SMALL DONATIONS.
BUT JUSTICE GINSBURG ACTUALLY
THOUGHT THAT THE AGGREGATE
LIMITS ENCOURAGE MORE SPEECH
BECAUSE THEY REQUIRE CANDIDATES
AND PARTIES TO CAST A BROADER
NET TO BRING IN MORE DONORS IN
ORDER TO GET THE MONEY THEY NEED
TO RUN THE ELECTION.
>> Woodruff: SO JUST QUICKLY, A
SENSE TODAY FROM WHAT THE
JUSTICES WERE SAYING?
>> MY SENSE IS THE AGGREGATE
LIMITS ARE IN A LOT OF TROUBLE
WITH THE COURT AND CHIEF JUSTICE
ROBERTS WAS LOOKING FOR A
NARROWER WAY TO DECIDE IT BUT HE
DIDN'T GET MUCH HELP FROM EITHER
SIDE'S LAWYERS.
>> Woodruff: MARCIA COYLE, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: TO DEBATE THE
ISSUE, I SPOKE A SHORT TIME AGO
WITH REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN REINCE
PRIEBUS.
THE R.N.C. BROUGHT THE CASE TO
THE COURT.
AND U.S. REPRESENTATIVE DAVID
PRICE, DEMOCRAT OF NORTH
CAROLINA, WHO FILED A BRIEF WITH
THE COURT IN SUPPORT OF CURRENT
CAMPAIGN FINANCE DONATION
LIMITS.
r
REINCE PRIEBUS AND
REPRESENTATIVE DAVID PRICE,
WELCOME TO THE NEWSHOUR.
MR. PRIEBUS, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
WHY DOES THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE WANT TO MAKE IT
POSSIBLE FOR PEOPLE MAKE
UNLIMITED CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
CANDIDATES AND THE PARTIES OF
THEIR CHOICE?
>> WE'RE NOT CHALLENGING THE
IDEA THAT PEOPLE STILL HAVE
INDIVIDUAL LIMITS TO CONGRESSMEN
AND PARTIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
ALL WE'RE CHALLENGING IS THE
AGGREGATE LIMIT THAT A PERSON
CAN GIVE IN TOTAL TO ALL
CANDIDATESTOR ALL POLITICAL
PARTIES.
AND PART OF THE PROBLEM IS THIS
AND I THINK WHAT WE SAW TODAY,
NO MATTER WHERE YOU WERE -- NO
MATTER WHERE YOU WERE SITTING I
THINK THERE WAS AGREEMENT TODAY
THAT THE CURRENT STATE OF THE
LAW, THE WAY THAT THINGS ARE
GOING AS FAR AS MONEY AND
POLITICS IS NOT A SUSTAINABLE
MODEL.
WE'VE BEEN TRYING TO ADVOCATE
THAT PARTIES-- AT LEAST FROM OUR
STANDPOINT-- SHOULD HAVE MORE
ABILITY TO RAISE MONEY BECAUSE
WE ARE DISCLOSING EVERYTHING AND
ALL OF OUR DONOR INFORMATION ON
A MONTHLY BASIS TO THE FEDERALi
ELECTION COMMISSION.
WHAT'S HAPPENED IS THE MONEY HAS
GONE OUTSIDE OF THE CANDIDATES
AND OUTSIDE OF THE PARTY
COMMITTEES AND THEY'VE GONE TO
OTHER INDEPENDENT PACS OR SUPER
PACS AS PEOPLE CALL THEM AND
THEYr HAVE UNLIMITED ACCESS TO
MONEY BUT THEY DISCLOSE NOTHING
TO ANYBODY.
SO WHAT'S HAPPENED IN THE LAW IS
THE TOTAL OPPOSITE OF WHAT I
THINK MOST PEOPLE INTENDED.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE'RE REALLY
TALKING ABOUT TODAY.
>> Woodruff: AND CONGRESSMAN
PRICE, WHY IS IT A BAD IDEA TO
DO WHAT THE REPUBLICANS ARE
SAYING?
TO PUT, IN OTHER WORDS, NO
LIMITS ON THE TOTAL AMOUNT THAT
CAN BE GIVEN.
>> WELL, IF I'M THE ONE WHO'S
SUPPOSED TO DEFEND SUPER PACS,
THINK AGAIN.
I THINK IT'S A TERRIBLE
DECISION, THE CITIZENS UNITED
DECISION.
BUT THE NOTION THAT THE CURE TO
THAT IS TO OPEN UP A WHOLE NEW
CATEGORY OF SUPERDONORS I THINK
IS LIKELY TO COMPOUND THE
PROBLEM.
IT WOULD EVEN FURTHER DILUTE THE
VOICE OF SMALL DONORS AND OF
SMALL CONTRIBUTORS AND ALSO IT
WOULD OVERRIDE THAT DISTINCTION
THAT THE COURT HAS MAINTAINED
FOR A LONG, LONG TIME.
THAT THE DANGER OF CORRUPTION
AND THE APPEARANCE OF CORRUPTION
IS MUCH GREATER WHEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT CONTRIBUTIONS.
OF COURSE, I AGREE CONTRIBUTIONS
ARE GOING TO ADD UP TO HUGE
AMOUNTS OF MONEY AND COMPOUND
THAT PERCEPTION OF CORRUPTION.
>> Woodruff: REINCE PRIEBUS, WHY
ISN'T ITi A CONCERN THAT ALLOWG
THESE LARGE CONTRIBUTIONS THAN
YOU WOULD BE AS CONGRESSMAN
PRICE SAID POTENTIALLY
OVERRIDING THE VOICE OF SMALL
DONORS, PEOPLE WHO CANNOT AFFORD
TO GIVE VERY MUCH TO A
POLITICIAN?
>> NO, I DON'T THINK THAT'S THE
CASE AT ALL BECAUSE EACH
INDIVIDUAL CANDIDATE IS STILL
GOING TO HAVE A LIMIT AS TO HOW
MANY -- WHAT THE INDIVIDUAL
LIMIT OF THE CONTRIBUTION IS.
SO IF TODAY UNDER THE LAW I CAN
GIVE TO 18 PARTICULAR CANDIDATES
AT A FULL MAXIMUM LEVEL THE
QUESTION IS WHY IS GIVING TO 19
SUPPOSED TO BE ILLEGAL UNDER E
LAW?
HERE'S THE POINT: I'M TRYING TO
PUT MORE DISCLOSED MONEY INTO
THE SYSTEM, NOT MORE MONEY.
THE MONEY'S GOING TO BE THERE.
I MEAN, GUYS, WE'RE LIVING IN A
DIFFERENT UNIVERSE IF WE DON'T
THINK THAT THERE'S BOAT LOTTSiF
MONEY IN POLITICS.
>> Woodruff: LET ME ASK
CONGRESSMAN PRICE.
THE DISCLOSURE POINT HE'S MAKING
AND THAT IT'S A MATTER OF NOT
RAISING HOW MUCH YOU CAN GIVE TO
ONE CANDIDATE BUT YOU CAN GIVE
TO MORE CANDIDATES.
>> WELL, I'M DELIGHTED TO HEAR
THE CHAIRMAN'S COMMITMENT TO
DISCLOSURE.
I HOPE HE'S IN GOOD TOUCH WITH
SENATOR McCONNELL BECAUSE WE'VE
BEEN PROPOSING IN THE DISCLOSE
ACT FOR FULL DISCLOSURE.
WHATEVER YOU THINK OF THE
SUPREME COURT'S DECISION IN
CITIZENS UNITED.
SURELY WE CAN AGREE AS WE DID
FOR MANY MORE YEARS UNTIL
SENATOR McCONNELL CHANGED HIS
POSITION SURELY WE CAN AGREE
THATii DISCLOSURE IS DESIRABL.
THAT WE NEED TO HAVE A FULL
ACCOUNTING OF WHO'S GIVING TO
THESE SUPER PACS.
>> I THINK CONGRESSMAN'S -- THE
CONGRESSMAN IS SORT OF MISSING
THE POINT HERE.
THE POINT IS WHETHER OR NOT IS
BY KEEPING THE BASE LIMITS IN
PLACE AND ALLOWING PEOPLE TO
DONATE TO MANY CANDIDATES AS
THEY WANT TO IT'S THAT -- IS
THAT CREATING CORRUPTION WITHIN
A SYSTEM THAT ALREADY ALLOWS A
PERSON TO WRITE A $10 MILLION
CHECK TO A SUPER PAC?
THE POINT IS ITi DOESN'T!
AND THAT'S THE QUESTION BEFORE
THE COURT.
IF QUESTION BEFORE THE COURT
ISN'T HOW TO JUST MAKE EVERYONE
FEEL AND BOY ISN'T THAT TOO MUCH
NONE?
THAT'S NOT THE QUESTION BEFORE
THE COURT.
THE QUESTION BEFORE THE COURT IS
IS KEEPING THE BASE LIMITS IN
PLACE BUT ALLOWING PEOPLE TO
CONTRIBUTE TO AS MANY CANDIDATES
AS THEY WANT, DO HUSBAND THAT
ENCOURAGE SDPLUPGS AND THE
ANSWER IS NO!
> Wo>odruff: LET ME GIVE
CONGRESSMAN PRICE A CHANCE TO
ANSWER THAT.
>> IF YOU'RE WORRIED ABOUT
PARTIES AND CANDIDATES NOT HAVE
A PIECE OF THE ACTION EVEN WITH
THE NEW RULES IN PLACE IN 2012,
THEY GAVE OVER $5 BILLION, 83%
OF THEIR CONTRIBUTION.
SO AS BAD AS THESE SUPER PACS
ARE AND AS UNACCOUNTABLE AS THEY
ARE THEY STILL ACCOUNT FOR 17%
OF THE CONTRIBUTIONS.
SO THE PARTIES AND CANDIDATES
ARE DOING JUST THAT BUT THE
EXCITING THING I'VE HEARD IN
THIS INTERVIEW IS THE COMMITMENT
TO DISCLOSURE.
WE COULD LEVEL THAT PLAYING
FIELD WITH REGARD TO DISCLOSURE.
SO LET'S HAVE AT IT.
LET'S MAKE SURE THE SUPER PACS
AND THE SO-CALLED SOCIAL ISSUE
GROUPS DISCLOSE WHO'S FINANCING
THEM.
>> Woodruff: AND CONGRESSMAN
PRICE QUICKLY.
YOUR POINT ABOUT BEING ABLE TO
CONTRIBUTE TO MORE CANDIDATES.
>> MR. McCUTCHEON WHO BROUGHT
THIS CASE, HE'S NOT BEEN
HAMSTRUNG JUST BECAUSE HE COULD
NOT GIVE TO AN AGGREGATE OF 17
CANDIDATES.
THE GUY GAVE
$300,000.
HE HAS A SUPER PAC HIMSELF.
I'M NOT WORRIED ABOUT
MR. McCUTCHEON'S FREE SPEECH
RIGHTS OR HIS ABILITY TO SUPPORT
AS MANY CANDIDATES AS HE WANTS.
>> Woodruff: QUICK FINAL WORD,
REINCE PRIEBUS.
>> HERE'S THEi ISSUE: IFr A PN
WANTS TO GIVE TO THE DEMOCRATIC
SENATORIAL COMMITTEES, THE
REPUBLICAN CONGRESSIONAL
COMMITTEES AND THE REPUBLICAN
NATIONAL COMMITTEE, UNDER THE
LAW, THE LAW SAYS THEY COULDN'T
DO THAT.
AND I DON'T UNDERSTAND HOW BY
GIVING TO TWO ANDi $10,000 TO A
THIRD ACTUALLY PREVENTS
CORRUPTION.
I MEAN, I -- THAT'S THE ISSUE
BEFORE THE COURT.
AND WE'RE GETTING INTO A
CONVERSATION ABOUT ISSUES THAT
ARE NOT BEFORE THE COURT AND THE
FREEDOM OF SPEECH SHOULDTHAT A E
INDIVIDUAL LIMITS SHOULD BE ABLE
TO GIVE TO WHOMEVER THEY WANT TO
GIVE TO.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU HAVE A FINAL
COMMENT CONGRESSMAN PRICE ABOUT
THAT CORRUPTION?
>> WELL, ALL I CAN SAY IS THAT
FOR FOUR DECADES THE COURT HAS
SAIDr THAT THERE'S A PARTICULAR
PROBLEM WITH DIRECT
CONTRIBUTIONS IN TERMS OF
CORRUPTION AND THE PERCEPTION OF
CORRUPTION.
NOW, I -- Ii THINK THERE'S THE
SAME PROBLEM WITH RESPECT TO
EXPENDITURES BUT THE COURT HAS
NOT THOUGHT SO.
THE COURT HAS THOUGHT THAT
CONTRIBUTIONS WERE WARRANTED
SPECIAL REGULATIONS AND THAT'S
WHAT OUR REPUBLICAN FRIENDS ARE
SAYING SHOULD BE OVERTURNED.
IT'S A MAJOR UNLEASHING OF A
WHOLE NEW CLASS OF SUPERDONORS.
>> Woodruff: WE ARE GOING TO
HAVE TO LEAVE IT THERE,
GENTLEMEN.
WE'LL BE WATCHING THE COURT.
CONGRESSMAN DAVID PRICE, REINCE
PRIEBUS, CHAIRMAN OF THE
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, HOW THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN IS AFFECTING
ONE COLORADO COMMUNITY, STILL
RECOVERING FROM LAST MONTH'S
DEVASTATING FLOODS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MARY JO BROOKS
HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: THE FLOODWATERS
THAT SWEPT THROUGH ESTES PARK A
MONTH AGO DAMAGED HUNDREDS OF
BUILDINGS AND DESTROYED TWO MAIN
ROADS THAT LED INTO TOWN.
THE SEWAGE SYSTEM WAS SO BROKE
THAN A THIRD OF THE RESIDENTS
STILL MUST USE PORT-A-POTTYS
THAT HAVE BEEN SET UP THROUGHOUT
THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
IN SPITE OF ALL THAT, FOLKS HERE
HAVE BEEN WORKING ROUND THE
CLOCK TO GET THEIR TOWN BACK N
SHAPE FOR THRONGS OF TOURISTS
WHO COME EVERY YEAR TO VIEW THE
SPECTACUR FLAALL COLORS.
ESTES IS THE GATEWAY TOTSE
ROY MCKOUNTAIN NATIONAL PARK,
WHICH DRAWS MORE THANi THREE
MILLION VISITORS A YEAR.
THE TOWN OF
6,000 PEOPLE DEPENDS ON THE PARK
FOR ITS LIVELIHOOD AND RESIDENTS
WERE HOPEFUL THAT A STRONG
OCTOBER TOURIST SEASON COULD
HELPITH W THEIR FINANCIAL
RECOVERY.
THEY MANAGED TO GET 90% OF THEIR
SHOPS AND RESTAURANTS BACK
OPEN-- AND THEN CAME THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
>> THE DOUBLE WHAMMY WITH THE
PARK BEINGi CLOSED.
>> Reporter: FRANK LANCASTER IS
THE TOWN'S MINIADSTRATOR.
HE SAYS THE CLOSURE OF ROCKY
MOUNTAIN NATIONAL PARK IS
DEVASTATING.
>> 65%OF OUR REVENUE COMES FROr
TOURISM DOLLARS AND ABOUT 45% OF
THE JOBS HERE IN TOWN ARE BASED
ON TOURISM DOLLARS.
WE'RE ALREADY SEEING SOME
BUSINESSES HAVING TO LAY SOME
FOLKS OFFAU
IT'S AOMB CINATION OF THE FLOOD,
THE ROADS BEING CLOSED AND THE
PARK BEING CLOSED.
IT'S TOUGH.
IT'S KIND OF A TRIFECTA OF
DISASTERS HERE.
>> Reporter: TRISHA JACOBS
CONSIDERS HERSELF ONE OF THE
LUCKY ONES.
SHE AND HER HUSBAND MANAGE
KIRK'S FLYi FISHING SHOP.
THE STORE SUFFERED ONLY MINOR
DAMAGE BUT NEWS OF THE FLOOD
CAUSED MANY FISHING TRIPS TO BE
CANCELED ANDi SOME EMPLOYEES TO
BE LAID OFF.
THE CLOSURE OF THE PARK HAS
MEANT EVEN MORE CANCELLATIONS.
>> A LOT OF US HERE LIKE WE WERi
DOWN AS WAS AND THEN SOMEBODY
JUST KICKED US WHILE WE WERE
DOWN.
THEY TOOK EVERYTHING AWAY FROM
US BY CLOSING THE PARK.
LAST WEEK WE HADi FEWER PEOPLE,
BUT THERE WERE STILL PEOPLE IN
TOWN.
THIS WEEKi IT'S JUST WAY
DIFFERENT.
I MEAN, HARDLY ANYBODY.
>> Reporter: JACOBS SAYS THOSE
WHO DO COME ARE CONFUSED--
ESPECIALLY TOURISTS FROM ABROAD.
>> THE EUROPEANS DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHY WITH THE
DISAGREEMENT IN WASHINGTON WHY
THEY WOULD SHUT DOWN THE PARKS.
AND I HAVE TO SAY THAT EVEN THE
AMERICANS DON'T UNDERSTAND IT
BECAUSE THOSE PARKS ARE FOR US.
>> Reporter: JULIE PEEPER IS ONE
OF THOSE WHO'S BEEN VEXED BY THE
CLOSURE.
SHE AND HER HUSBAND OWN TWO
RESTAURANTS IN ESTES THAT WERE
HEAVILY FLOOD DAMAGED.
THEY AREr RACING TO REOPEN ONEN
THE NEXT FEW DAYS TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THE FALL SEASON.
SHE SAYS THE CLOSURE OF THE PARK
A
FINANCIAL SETBACK FOR SMALL
BUSINESSES AND FOR 200 PARK
EMPLOYEES WHO HAVE BEEN
FURLOUGHED, IT HAS BEEN AN
EMOTIONAL BLOW.
>> THE DAY THE PARK CLOSED DOWN
I THINK EVERYBODY HAD A LITTLE
MINI MELTDOWN BECAUSE THAT WAS
THE PLACE WE COULD ALL GO TO GEi
AWAY FROM DEBRIS AND THE REALITY
OF MOLD AND WET CARPET AND YOU
COULD GET OUTSIDE AND BLOW OFF A
LITTLE STEAM AND WE CAN'T DO
THAT NOW.
AND THAT'S BEEN HARD.
>> Reporter: THE ONE THING THAT
HASN'T YET BEEN AFFECTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN IS EMERGENCY
DISASTER AID FROM FEDERAL
AGENCIES.
FEMA STILL HAS MORE THAN A
THOUSAND WORKERS ON THE GROUND
IN COLORADO.
THE AND 150 COLORADO NATIONAL
GUARDSMEN WHO WERE TO BE
FURLOUGHED WERE KEPT ONi THE JB
LAST WEEK WHEN GOVERNOR JOHN
HICKEN LOOPER ANNOUNCE HEAD
WOULD USE STATE MONEY TO PAY FOR
THEM.
IT'S LIKELY TO COST MORE THAN
$60,000 A DAY.
THE GUARDSMEN ARE WORKING WITH
THE STATE'S DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION TO REPAIR THE
FLOOD.S ROADS AND HIGHWAYS THAT
ADMINISTRATOR LANCASTER SAYS
HE'S GRATEFUL THAT HELP IS
CONTINUING BUT SAYS IT'S HARD TO
MOVE FORWARD WITH LONG-TERM
PLANNING WHEN FEDERAL AGEIESNC
LIKE THE TERM CORPS OF ENGINES
AND THE FOREST SERVICE ARE SHUT
DOWN.5,
THE FEMA FOLKS ARE HERE, WE HAVE
COAST GUARD PEOPLE HERE HELPING
WITH US HAZARDOUS WASTE PROBLEMS
BUT WHEN IT COMES DOWN TO THE
ONGOING RECOVERY AND GETTING
BACK ON OUR FEET, THE FOLKS THAT
WE NEED TO HELP AREN'T WORKING.
THEY'VE BEEN FURLOUGHED.
>> Reporter: GOVERNOR HICKEN
LOOPER HOPES TO HELP WITH THAT
PROCESS. APLAYED FOR WAIVERS TO
ALLOW STATE WORKERS TO CARRY OUT
SOME OFi THE DUTIES OF FURLOUGD
FEDERAL WORKERS UNTIL THE
SHUTDOWN HAS BEEN RESOLVED.
SO FAR, THE GOVERNOR HAS
RECEIVED NO ANSWER.
>> Woodruff: NOW BACK TO THE
WEEKEND MILITARY ACTIONS IN
LIBYA AND SOMALIA.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS VOWING THAT
SUSPECTED AL QAEDA LEADER ABU
ANAS AL-LIBY-- CAPTURED IN LIBYA
ON SATURDAY AND NOW BEING HELD
ON A U.S. WARSHIP-- WILL BE
BROUGHT TO JUSTICE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR NEWSMAKER
INTERVIEW.
i
>> Brown:i WE DISCUSS THE PLAYD
IN THE LIBYA AND ITS AFTERMATH
WITH PRESIDENT OBAMA'S CHIEF
COUNTERTERRORISM ADVISOR LISA
MONACO.
WELCOME TO YOU.
IN HIS PRESS CONFERENCE TODAY
THE PRESIDENT SAID WHERE WE'VE
GOT ACTIVE PLOTS AND ACTIVE
NETWORKS WE'RE GOING TO GO AFTER
THEM.
WAS THERE AN ACTIVE, IMMINENT
THREAT THE CASE OF AL-LIBI?
>> WELL, I THINK, JEFF, WHAT YOU
SAW HERE WAS A DEMONSTRATION OF
THE INCREDIBLE PROFESSIONALISM
OF THE MEN AND WOMEN IN THE
ARMED FORCES AND CONDUCTING THE
RAID THAT OCCURRED OVER THE
WEEKEND.
AND AN AYS IN A AL-LIBIi DID PE
A THREAT TO THE UNITED STATES,
HE WAS A SENIOR AL QAEDA MEMBER
AND SOMEBODY WHO IS ALSO CHARGED
IN AN INDICTMENT FOR HIS ROLE AS
PART OF THE AL QAEDA WORLDWIDE
CONSPIRACY.
>> ONE OF THE QUESTIONS THAT
ARIDESS IN A CASE LIKE THESE, IS
THERE A CLEAR STANDARD IN
DETERMINING WHEN THE U.S. GOES
INTO ANOTHER COUNTRY?
>> THE STANDARD IS ONE TO GO
AFTER THOSE WHO WOULD SEEK TO DO
US HARM.
AND WHAT YOU SAW IN THE CASE OF
THE AL-LIBI RAID WAS,i FRANK,
THE UNRELENTING FOCUS TO GO
AFTER THEM NO PLATTER HOW LONG
IT TAKES.
>> Brown: WAS IT MORE FOR WHAT
HE HAD DONE IN THE PAST THAT HE
WAS INDICTED FOR OR SOrS KIND OF
IMMINENT THREAT HE WAS INVOLVED
IN.
>> WELL, I THINK WITH THE CASE
OF AL-LIBI HE CERTAINLY POSES A
THREAT AND DID POSE A THREAT.
HE'S NOW IN THE CUSTODY OF THE
UNITED STATES M
BUT HE DID POSE A THREAT AS A
SENIOR MEMBER OF AL QAEDA.
BUT HE ALSO-- AS HAS BEEN SAID
AND HAS BEEN DEMONSTRATED-- IS A
CHARGED AL QAEDA MEMBER.
>> HE'S BEING HELD ON THE SHIP.
TODAY YOU HAD LIBYA'S PRIME
MINISTER SAID THAT HE SHOULD BE
TRIED IN LIBYA.
YOU'VE HAD REPUBLICANS SAY HE
SHOULD BE SENT TO GUANTANAMO.
WE'VE SEEN CIVIL LIBERTARIAN
GROUPS SAY HE SHOULD BE READ HIS
MIRANDA RIGHTS AND TREATED AS A
CRIMINAL UNDER U.S. CRIMINAL
LAW.
WHAT EXACTLY IS HIS STATUS?
>> HIS STATUS THAT HE'S BEING
HELD BY THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY CONSISTENT WITH THE
AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE OF
MILITARY FORCE.
WHAT THIS RAID DEMONSTRATED AND
WHAT THIS OPERATION DEMONSTRATED
IS OUR TOP PRIORITY IS TO GO
AVENUE THOSE WHO DO POSE A
THREAT AND WHOr DO SEEK TO DO S
HARM.
BUT ALSO TO ALWAYS FIRST IF WE
CAN CAPTURE AND OBTAIN
INTELLIGENCE FROM THOSE
INDIVIDUALS.
>> Brown: DO YOU EXPECT HIM TO
BE BROUGHT TO TRIAL IN THE
UNITED STATES?
>> I'M NOT GOING TO GET AHEAD OF
THAT PROCESS BUT WHAT I WILL SAY
IS THAT OUR FIRST PRIOR CITY TO
GET INTELLIGENCE TESTIMONY FROM
FROM HIM.
AND AS WE'VE SEEN IN OTHER
OPERATIONS OF THIS KIND AS WITH
WAR SAMMY WHO YOU MAY REMEMBER
WHO WAS ALSO CAPTURED BY OUR OWN
FORCES IN A VERY PROFESSIONAL
RAID THERE AS WELL THAT OUR GOAL
IS TO GET INTELLIGENCE AND THEN
ULTIMATELY TO PROSECUTE THE
INDIVIDUAL.
>> I ASK BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY
THERE'S A QUESTION ABOUT WHETHER
THERE'S A LEGAL LIMBO TO KEEP
HIM ON A SHIP IN INTERNATIONAL
WATERS AVOIDING GUANTANAMO ON
THE ONE HAND, AVOIDING U.S.
COURTS ON THE OTHER.
IS THIS A SET STRATEGY OF THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT fVU
>> WELL, I THINK WHAT IT SHOWS
IS A VERY CLEAR STRATEGY BY THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT TO USE ALL THE
TOOLS, FRANKLY, IN OUR TOOL BOX
TO DISRUPT THREATS, TO GO AFTER
CONSISTENT WITH THE RULE OF LAW,
INDIVIDUALS WHO POSE A THREAT,
TO GET INTELLIGENCE AND THEN
ULTIMATELY TO MAKE A DECISION
ABOUT WHAT THE BEST DISPOSITION
IS FORi THAT INDIVIDUAL AND TO
PROSECUTE AND HOLD PEOPLE
ACCOUNTABLE NO MATTER HOW LONG
IT TAKES.
>> Brown: ONE OF THE LINGERING
QUESTIONS IN THIS CASE IS DID
THE U.S. HAVE THE COOPERATION,
SUPPORT, AND/OR BACKING OF THE
LIBYAN GOVERNMENT IN THE RAID?
>> WELL, JEFF WE ALWAYS CONSULT
WITH NATIONS WITH WHOM WE HAVE
STRATEGIC RELATIONSHIPS AS WE DO
WITH THE GOVERNMENT OFi LIBYA.
I THINK WHAT YOU SAW TODAY IS
THE PRIME MINISTER MADE A
STATEMENT THAT HE VALUES THE
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED
STATES AND THAT THE UNITED
STATES IS A SUPPORTER OF THE
LIBYAN PEOPLE AS WE ARE AND WE
WILL CONTINUE TO BE SO TO HELP
THEM BUILD THEIR CAPACITY TO
ADDRESS SECURITY CHALLENGES.
>> Brown: I'M NOT SURE HOW TO
READ THAT, THOUGH.
BEFORE THE RAID WAS THERE THE
O.K. OR THE SUPPORT FROM THE
LIBYANS?
>> JEFF, I THINK -- I'M NOT
GOING TO GET INTOi OUR
CONSULTATIONS THAT HAPPENED IN
-- ALL OVER THEUORLD WITH
PARTNERS AND WITH OTHER
GOVERNMENTS.
>> Brown: WHAT'S THE SITUATION
NOW?
THERE HAVE BEEN THREATS ON
SOCIAL MEDIA FROM LIBYA AND
NORTH AFRICA ABOUT REPRISALS.
>> WELL, IT'S ALWAYS A CONCERN
AND I THINK YOU'VE SEEN THE
PRESIDENT HAS TALKED ABOUT THIS,
ABOUT THE DIFFUSE THREATS THAT
WE FACE AND IT'S ONE THAT WE
WILL CONTINUE TO GO AFTER AND WE
WILL NOT STOP FROM THAT.
BUT IT'S ALSO ONE THAT WE HAVE
TO FACE WITH A MULTITUDE OF
TOOLS, WHETHER IT'S DIRECT
ACTION AND CAPTURE OPERATIONS,
LIKE YOU SAW OVER THE WEEKEND,
WHETHER IT'S WITH THE USE OF
LETHAL FORCE WHEN NO OTHER TOOL
IS CAPABLE TO BE USED OR WHEN
IT'S WORKING IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
OTHER GOVERNMENTS AND BUILDING
CAPACITY.
WE'RE GOING TO USE ALL THOSE
TOOLS.
>> Brown: I DO WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THE RAID IN SOMALIA WHICH
DID NOT GET THE TARGET.
IS THERE ANY MORE INFORMATION
ABOUT WHETHER HE WAS INVOLVED IN
THE NAIROBI MALL KILLINGS?
>> HE WAS NOT INVOLVED IN THAT
AND THERE WAS NOT THAT
INFORMATION IN THIS -- WE HAVE
NO INFORMATION THAT HE WAS
INVOLVED IN THAT ATTACK AND THIS
RAID WAS NOT CONDUCTED BASED ON
THE WEST GATE MALL ATTACK.
THERE AGAIN THAT'S AN EXAMPLE OF
THE INCREDIBLE PRECISION AND
PROFESSIONALISM OF OUR ARMED
FORCES AND THE RESTRAINT THAT
THEY SHOWED AS THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE HAS TALKED ABOUT WITH
TREMENDOUS CARE FOR NOT
INFLICTING CIVILIAN CASUALTIES.
>> Brown: IS THAT, IN FACT, WHAT
HAPPENED?
THEY RAN INTO MORE THAN EXPECTED
CIVILIANS AND PULLED BACK?
>> I THINK AS THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE HAS SAID: THEY UNDERTOOK
THIS OPERATION TO GO AFTER AN
AL-SHABAAB COMMANDER AND
ULTIMATELY THEY MADE THE
DECISION TO DISENGAGE AND IT WAS
A DECISION MADE AND AN OPERATION
THAT WAS UNDERTAKE WITHIN
TREMENDOUS PRESIS AND CARE.
>> Brown: LET ME JUST ASK YOU
FINALLY, BRIEFLY, HOW SHOULD
AMERICANS UNDERSTAND THE
TERRORISM THREAT NOW IN NORTH
AFRICA AND SUBSAHARAN AFRICA?
DO THESE GROUPS HAVE THE
CAPABILITY OF ACTING BEYOND
THEIR REGION?
INCLUDING REACHING TO THE U.S.?
>> JEFF, THAT'S SOMETHING WE'RE
ALWAYS GOING TO BE CONCERNED
ABOUT.
I THINK WHAT WE HAVE SEEN AND
THE PRESIDENT TALKED ABOUT IT
TODAY IS GROUPS THAT MAY HAVE
ORIGINAL FOCUS BUT WE HAVE TO BE
CONCERNED, ULTIMATELY ALWAYS,
ABOUT THEIR ABILITY TO GO AFTER
OUR INTERESTS AND OUR PERSONNEL
AND OUR FACILITIESr IN THAT PAT
OF THE WORLD BUT ALSO THEIR
ABILITY TO PROJECT A THREAT
AGAINST THE UNITED STATES AND WE
WILL CONTINUE TO GO AFTER THAT
THREAT.
THE.
>> Brown: LISA MONACO, WHITE
HOUSE COUNTERTERRORISM ADVISOR,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Woodruff: NOW, PREPARING
STUDENTS FOR THE DIGITAL
ECONOMY.
A NEW REPORT OUT TODAY FINDS
YOUNGER AMERICANS FALL BEHIND
THEIR PEERS IN OTHER
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES WHEN IT
COMES TO THE MATH AND TECHNICAL
SKILLS NEEDED FOR THE MODERN
WORKPLACE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOHN
TULENKO OF LEARNING MATTERS
LOOKS AT A PROGRAM THAT TRIES TO
ADDRESS THAT PROBLEM.
>> WHAT DO YOU ACTUALLY THINK
YOU NEED TO HAVE TO BE AN
ENTREPRENEUR?
>> YOU HAVE TO HAVE DRIVE AND
THE WILLINGNESS TO GO OUT THERE
AND DO WHAT HAS TO BE DONE TO
ACHIEVE YOUR GOL.A
>> Reporter: THESE 45 PUBLIC
HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS IN NEW YORK
CITY ARE TAKING BIG STRIDES
TOWARD ACHIEVING THEIR DREAMS.
>> I WANT TO MAKE THE NEW
FACEBOOK, AND THAT'S WHAT I'M
GOING TO DO.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE LEARNING
HOW TO SUCCEED AS HIGH-TECH
ENTREPRENEURS IN A FREE SUMMER-
LONG PROGRAM CALLED GENTECH NYC.
COMPETING IN TEAMS, THEY'LL WORK
TO CREATE FULLY FUNCTIONAL,
ORIGINAL CELLPHONE APPS, WITH
BUSINESS PLANS TO SUPPORT THEM.
THE PROGRAM CATERS TO STUDENTS
WHOSE SCHOOLS OR CIRCUMSTANCES
CANNOT PROVIDE THIS KIND OF
OPPORTUNITY.
>> WE FEEL IT'S INCREDIBLY
IMPORTANT TO BE GIVING THESE
STUDENTS ACCESS.
>> Reporter: JORDAN RUNGE
DIRECTS THE PROGRAM, A
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE NEW YORK
CITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION AND THE NETWORK FOR
TEACHING ENTREPRENEURSHIP.
>> WE LOOK AT GENTECH AS BEING
THEIR FIRST STEP INTO THIS KIND
OF LARGER TECH WORLD.
>> Reporter: IT'S A BIG STEP AT
THAT, ESPECIALLY FOR A HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENT TO MAKE.
>> WE HAVE A BUNCH OF STUFF, AND
YOU CAN SEE SOME OF IT OVER
THERE.
>> Reporter: THEIR JOURNEY BEGAN
WITH A VERY LOW-TECH CHALLENGE.
>> THEY GAVE US PLAY-DOH,
PLATES, CONSTRUCTION PAPER,
SCISSORS, AND A GLUE STICK THAT
DIDN'T WORK.
>> I THOUGHT WE WERE GOING TO
WORK WITH THE TECH STUFF AT
FIRST TO START WITH, SO WHEN
THEY GAVE US ALL THE PAPER BAGS
AND EVERYTHING, I'M LIKE, AM I
IN THE RIGHT PROGRAM?
>> Reporter: THEIR ASSIGNMENT
WAS TO CREATE A NEW PRODUCT TO
EDUCATE OR ENTERTAIN CHILDREN
AGES 8 TO 12.
>> IT WAS REALLY HARD, BECAUSE
THERE ARE JUST TOO MANY THINGS
OUT ALREADY.
IT'S HARD TO COME UP WITH AN
IDEA.
>> A LOT OF THEM WERE KIND OF
TAKEN BACK.
WAIT-- YOU WANT US TO GO MAKE
SOMETHING NOW?
I DON'T UNDERSTAND.
BECAUSE THAT'S JUST NOT WHAT
THEY'RE USED TO.
BUT THAT'S WHAT THIS IS ALL
ABOUT.
IT'S ABOUT CREATING SOMETHING--
YOU THINKING OF IT, DREAMING IT
UP, AND PUTTING IT OUT THERE FOR
THE WORLD TO CONSUME.
ALL RIGHT, LADIES AND GENTLEMAN,
IF WE COULD HAVE YOUR ATTENTION.
>> Reporter: THE BIGGER TEST OF
THEIR CREATIVITY CAME THE NEXT
DAY, WHEN JORDAN RUNGE ANNOUNCED
THE PROGRAM'S CENTRAL CHALLENGE.
>> YOU WILL BE TASKED WITH
CREATING A MOBILE APP THAT
IMPROVES THE QUALITY OF
EDUCATION OR CITY LIFE FOR NEW
YORK CITY STUDENTS.
>> Reporter: A $5,000 PRIZE
WOULD GO TO THE BEST APP.
>> IN TERMS OF EXPECTATIONS...
>> Reporter: AND JUST LIKE A
REAL STARTUP, THERE WERE URGENT
DEADLINES TO MEET.
STUDENTS HAD JUST 48 HOURS TO
COME UP WITH THEIR BIG IDEA.
>> BEFORE I WENT TO BED, I
WOULD, LIKE, PUT MY CLIPBOARD
NEXT TO MY BED IN CASE ANY
INSPIRATION CAME TO ME IN THE
MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT.
>> Reporter: FROM THE GET-GO,
GENTECH PUSHED ITS STUDENTS TO
TEST THEIR IDEAS.
INSTEAD OF GUESSWORK, THEY
CONDUCTED SURVEYS AND CRUNCHED
THE DATA TO DETERMINE WHICH OF
THEIR EVOLVING APPS HAD THE MOST
TRACTION.
>> WOULD LIKE TO BE ABLE TO TALK
WITH YOUR PEERS AND INTERACT
WITH THEM?
>> Reporter: THEY WERE ALSO
REQUIRED TO SHARE THEIR IDEAS.
>> WE HAD AN ENTREPRENEUR KIND
OF SPEED DATING ROUND WHERE THEY
HAD TO GET SOME FEEDBACK ABOUT
THEIR IDEAS.
>> IF YOU WERE TO MAKE A STUDY
GUIDE, WOULDOU  YFOLLOW IT?
>> SOME PEOPLE SAY, WELL, I
DON'T WANT FOLKS TO STEAL MY
IDEAS, SO I CAN'T TALK ABOUT IT.
WELL, NO, YOU SHOULD TALK ABOUT
IT, BECAUSE THAT'S HOW YOU
FIGURE OUT IF IT'S A GOOD IDEA
OR NOT.
AND ONE, THAT'S WHAT YOU DO.
BUT SECOND OF ALL, THAT'S HOW
YOU GET PEOPLE ON BOARD WITH
YOU.
IF YOU WANT TO BUILD A TEAM
AROUND AN IDEA, YOU'VE GOT TO
TALK TO PEOPLE TO GET THEM
ONBOARD.
>> Reporter: TIME WAS ALSO
DEVOTED TO LEARNING TO CODE--
AND TO SOMETHING OFTEN
OVERLOOKED BY TEENS.
>> THE WAY YOU PRESENT YOURSELF
IS EXTREMELY IMPORTANT, AND, OF
COURSE, WE'RE GOING TO START OFF
WITH YOUR DRESS.
LOOK BEHIND ME ON THIS
SMARTBOARD.
>> WHEN HE FIRST PULLED UP THAT
FIRST SLIDE, I'M, LIKE, OH,
LORD, WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO BE
MacGYVER AND MAKE OUR OWN SUITS
TODAY.
>> YOU HAVE TO MAKE SURE YOU
LOOK THE PART, BECAUSE, SADLY,
WE'RE GOING TO JUDGE YOU.
>> SO I MANAGED TO SURVIVE THREE
GRUELING ROUNDS OF VENTURE
FINANCING.
THIS IS SUPER, SUPER HARD.
>> Reporter: DRESS CODES WERE
NOT ENFORCED UPON START-UP
C.E.O.'s WHO CAME IN EACH DAY TO
SHARE THEIR SUCCESS STORIES. CO.
>> IT'S SOMETHING WE TELL KIDS.
WE'LL GO TO A TECH COMPANY, AND
THEY'LL GO, WELL, THEY'RE ALL IN
JEANS AND A T-SHIRT.
I SAY, THAT'S GREAT, BECAUSE
THEY EARNED THEIR SPOT TO BE
THERE IN JEANS AND T-SHIRT.
YOU'RE A HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT.
TO SHOW PEOPLE YOU'RE SERIOUS,
YOU CAN'T LOOK LIKE HIGH SCHOOL
STUDENTS.
DRESS IN BUSINESS CASUAL.
SO TODAY IS THE CULMINATION OF
THIS FIRST WEEK AND ALL THE WORK
YOU'VE BEEN DOING.
>> Reporter: ALL THIS WHILE
STUDENTS HAD BEEN WORKING ON
THEIR BIG IDEA FOR AN APP, FOR
WHICH THEY PREPARED A 90-SECOND
PITCH.
>> MY APP IS CALLED THE FAST
PLAN.
>> Reporter: FOR THE NEXT HOUR,
STUDENTS WOULD PUT IT ALL ON THE
LINE.
( APPLAUSE )
>> WE HAVE NOW HEARD EVERYBODY'S
PITCHES.
SO NOW IS THE FUN PART.
NOW YOU'RE GOING TO BE FORMING
INTO TEAMS.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS SCRAMBLED
TO EITHER BUILD A TEAM AROUND
THEIR OWN IDEA OR JOIN SOMEONE
ELSE'S.
WHAT HAPPENED IN YOUR CASE?
>> WELL, IT'S MORE LIKE PEOPLE
WANTED TO JOIN ME, BUT I DIDN'T
REALIZE THAT THEY WANTED TO DO
THEIR IDEA.
IT WAS JUST A PITCH FIGHT ALL
OVER AGAIN.
>> Reporter: WHEN ALL THE DUST
HAD SETTLED, THERE WERE NINE
TEAMS COMPETING FOR THE $5,000
PRIZE.
RAJESH'S TEAM SERVED UP MEALR,
WHICH OFFERS TEENS HEALTHY
RECIPES AND REWARDS SMART FOOD
CHOICES WITH DIGITAL BADGES.
COMPETITORS' REACTION?
>> I'M A TEEN.
I DON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT MY
DIET.
>> Reporter: BRANDON'S TEAM, NYC
LOOP, AIMS TO BE THE GO-TO PLACE
FOR TEENS IN SEARCH OF THINGS TO
DO IN NEW YORK.
>> I WOULDN'T REALLY DOWNLOAD
IT, BECAUSE FOR GROUPS LIKE
THAT, I USUALLY JUST USE
FACEBOOK TO CREATE AN EVENT.
>> Reporter: AND EMILY'S TEAM
WILL OFFER UP EMPIRE SH,BA
DAZZLINGLY MULTI-PLAYER GAMES
THAT TEACH NEW YORK CITY
HISTORY.
>> THE OVERARCHING THOUGHT ON
ALL OF THE STUDENTS APPS IS THAT
THEY'RE ALL GOING TO HAVE TO
NARROW DOWN WHATEVER IT IS THAT
THEY HA EVEVEN FURTHER TO ONE
CORE COMPONENT.
>> Reporter: TO TAKE THE APPS TO
THE NEXT LEVEL, GENTECH BROUGHT
THE STUDENTS TO THE PROS.
VOLUNTEER MENTORS FROM THE TECH
SECTOR WERE PAIRED WITH EACH
TEAM.
THEY'D MEET TWICE A WEEK FOR SIX
WEEKS AT COMPANIES LIKE
APPNEXUS, MICROSOFT, AND GOOGLE.
AT EMPIRE BASH, THE MINI-GAME
APP, MENTOR KRISTIN BOND WAS
EAGER TO GET STARTED.
>> I LIKE WORKING WITH KIDS, AND
I THOUGHT THIS WAS SUCH A COOL
PROGRAM THAT THEY'RE GETTING THE
OPPORTUNITY TO LEARN TO CODE AT
THIS AGE.
>> BUT THEN THE OBJECT OF THE
GAME IS TO...
>> Reporter: BUT BOND GOT A
SURPRISE WHEN SHE ASKED HER TEAM
ABOUT THE FEATURES THEY WANTED
TO BUILD.
>> HOW DO YOU UNLOCK A FORCE
FIELD?
>> THE ROBOTS.
THEY HAVE KEYS
>> THAT'S A THOUGHT.
>> WHEN THEY TOLD ME WHAT THEY
WANTED TO DO, MY FIRST REACTION
WAS, WHOA.
>> IT'S ROBOTS.
IT'S IN THE FUTURE.
IT SEEMED REALLY AMBITIOUS TO
ME-- NOT AN APP THAT WE CAN
BUILD.
>> THE PROBLEM WITH THE WHOLE
RECIPE THING...
>> Reporter: ACROSS THE ROOM,
MEALR, THE HEALTHY EATING APP,
WAS GETTING GRILLED.
>> WE HAVE FIVE MENTORS.
EACH AND EVERY ONE OF THEM
ATTACKED US.
IT'S LIKE ONE BY ONE.
>> Reporter: IT WAS A DIFFERENT
STORY AT NYC LOOP, THE ENTE
EVENTS CALENDAR.
>> OUR MENTORS WERE PRETTY
SUPPORTIVE OF THE IDEA.
THEY JUST TOLD THE REALNESS OF
WHAT WAS GOING TO ACTUALLY
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU HEAR
ABOUT EMPIRE BASH?>> THEY CHANG,
LIKE, SEVEN TIMES, RIGHT?
I THINK THEY'RE JUST SCRAMBLING
FOR THINGS TO DO AT THIS POINT.
>> WE'RE LIKE ADDING ROBOTS AND
ALIENS AND FORCE FIELDS.
THERE WERE TOO MANY MIXED IDEAS.
>> I DON'T WANT TO STIFLE THEIR
CREATIVITY.
I DON'T WANT TO TELL THEM THEIR
IDEAS AREN'T GOING TO WORK,
BECAUSE THAT'S NOT WHAT THIS
PROGRAM IS ABOUT.
>> WHAT DO YOU THINK?
SO WE'RE TRYING TO JUST ASK
QUESTIONS TO LET THEM REALLY
THINK ABOUT WHAT WOULD BE A GOOD
IDEA AND WHAT WOULD BE FEASIBLE.
>> Reporter: IT TOOK THREE
WEEKS, BUT EMILY'S TEAM FINALLY
LANDED ON AN ACHIEVABLE IDEA,
INSPYRU, A SCALED-DOWN MYSTERY
GAME FOR TEACHING MATH.
>> WE'RE FINALLY ALL ON THE SAME
PAGE.
WE CAN'T CHANGE THE IDEA NOW.
I'M SERIOUS!
>> Reporter: BUT IN ALL THIS
TIME, HER COMPETITORS HAD RACED
AHEAD.
>> EVERYTHING IS SLIDING
PERFECTLY.
SO WE'RE JUST GOING TO KEEP ON
GOING UNTIL IT'S COMPETITION
TIME.
>> THE FIRST FINALIST TO PRESENT
TONIGHT IS MEALR.
PLEASE WELCOME MEALR TO THE
STAGE.
>> Reporter: JUDGING TOOK PLACE
IN SEPTEMBER.
ONLY ONE TEAM WOULD WALK AWAY
WITH THE $5,0
>> AND THE WINNER IS SPROUTED.
>> Reporter: OUR TEAMS WERE THE
RUNNERS-UP, A COME-FROM-BEHIND
SECOND, THIRD PLACE, AND FOURTH.
>> Reporter: THEY DIDN'T WIN THE
$5,000, BUT THEY WERE STILL
REWARDED.
>> I HOPE THAT WHEN THEY LOOK
BACK ON THIS SUMMER THEY'LL SAY
TO THEMSELVES, WOW, I DID
SOMETHING I DIDN'T THINK THAT I
COULD DO.
AND I'M VERY EXCITED TO SEE WHAT
HAPPENS AFTER THIS AS THEY
CONTINUE TO LEARN.
>> Reporter: FOR THESE YOUNG MEN
AND WOMEN, THE JOURNEY HAS JUST
BEGUN.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
CLOSE UP LOOK AT THE NFL'S
RESPONSE TO PLAYERS' CONCUSSIONS
AND BRAIN INJURIES.
THAT'S THE SUBJECT OF A SPECIAL
TWO-HOUR FRONTLINE ON PBS
TONIGHT, CALLED "LEAGUE OF
DENIAL."
IT BEGINS WITH THE STORY OF MIKE
WEBSTER, WHO PLAYED FOR THE
PITTSBURGH STEELERS IN THE '70s
and '80s.
HE DIED IN 2002 AFTER SHOWING
SYMPTOMS OF BRAIN TRAUMA.
HERE'S AN EXCERPT.
>> WEBSTER'S SUNDAY AFTERNOONS
WERE SPENT ON THE LINE OF
SCRIMMAGE, BRUTAL TERRITORY
KNOWN AS "THE PIT."
>> HE HAD THE VIOLENCE IN HIM.
HE COULD EXPLODE INTO THE
PLAYER.
EVERY PLAY WAS A FIGHT.
>> WEBSTER'S FAVORITE WEAPON WAS
HIS HEAD.
>> WELL, WEB BIWOULD HIT YOU
WITH HIS HEAD FIRST AND WITH
THAT HEAD IT'D POP YOU AND THEN
HE'D LIFT YOUR SHOULDERS, HE'D
GET IT UP IN THE AIR, ONCEr YOU
HIT FULL SPEED YOU'RE MOVING
BACKWARDS AND HE HITS YOU,
YOU'RE GONE.
>> WHEN HE WOULD FIRE OFF THE
BALL, HE'S COMING TO BLOCK ME
AND IF I'Mi NOT READY FOR HIM
HE'S GOING TO PANCAKE ME.
HE'S GOING TO HURT ME.
>> Reporter: HALL OF FAME
LINEBACKER FOR THE NEW YORK
GIANTS HARRY CARSON WENT TO WAR
WITH MIKE WEBSTER.
>> AND SO I HAVE TO MEET FORCE
WITH FORCE.
ALLi OF MY POWER IS COMING FROM
MY BIG REAR END AND MY BIG
THIGHS INTO MY FOREARMS AND I
HIT HIM IN THE FACE, I HAVE TO
STUN HIM, GET MY HANDS ON HIM,
THROW HIM OFF WHEN I SEE WHERE
THE BALL IS GOING.
AND WHEN I HIT HIM IN THE FACE,
HIS HEAD IS GOING BACK, HE'S
GOING FORWARD BUT ALL OF A
SUDDEN HIS HEAD IS GOING BACK
AND HIS BRAIN IS HITTING UP
AGAINST THE INSIDE OF HIS SKULL.
>>  ONE HAS TO
EXPECT THAT ALMOST EVERY PLAY OF
EVERY GAME, EVERY PRACTICE
THEY'RE GOING TO BE HITTING
THEIR HEADS AGAINST EACH OTHER
THAT'S THE NATURE OF THE GAME.
THOSE THINGS SEEM TO HAPPEN
AROUND A THOUSAND TO 1500 TIMES
A YEAR.
EACH TIME THAT HAPPENS IT'S
AROUND 20G ORi MORE.
THAT'S THE EQUIVALENT OF DRIVING
A CAR 35 MILES PER HOUR INTO A
BRICK WALL.
>> Woodruff: RAY SUAREZ HAS MORE
ABOUT THE "FRONTLINE"
INFORMATION.
>> Suarez: MARK FAINARU-WADA OF
ESPN IS ONE OF THERINC PIPAL
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS WITH THE
DOCUMENTARY, AND HE'S THE CO-
AUTHOR OF THE ACCOMPANYING BOOK
BY THE SAME NAME.
MARK, WELCOME BACK TO THE
PROGRAM.
WE JUST SAW MIKE WEBSTER LINING
UP AT SCRIMMAGE AND CRASHING
INTO OTHER BIG MEN OVER AND OVER
AGAIN.
WHAT HAPPENED AFTER HIS PLAYING
DAYS WERE OVER?
>> WELL, RAY, ESSENTIALLY MIKE
WEBSTER WENT MAD AFTER HIS
CAREER HAD ENDED.
YOU KNOW, HE HAD A LIFE THAT
REALLY -- HE WAS A VERY
ARTICULATE, SMART GUY.
PEOPLE THOUGHT HE WOULD BECOME A
BROADCASTER OR A COACH AND IN
FACT WHAT HAPPENED TO HIM WAS
HIS LIFE SORT OF FELL APART.
WE DETAIL THIS EXTENSIVELY IN
THE BOOK AND IN THE FILM ABOUT
H
IN WHICH HE JUST -- YOU KNOW, HE
LOST MEMORY ISSUES, HE WAS
WRITING THOUSANDS OF LETTERS
THAT WERE BASICALLY INCOHERENT
IN MANY CASES.
HIS FINANCES FELL APART.
AND ULTIMATELY HE JUST DIDN'T
TAKE CARE OF HIMSELF IN ANY
PHYSICAL WAY, HIS BODY FELL
APART AND HE DIED AT THEi AGE F
50 OF A HEART ATTACK AND ON THE
DEATH CERTIFICATE IT ALSO LISTED
POST-CONCUSSION SYNDROME WAS A
CONTRIBUTING FACTOR TO HIS
DEATH.
>> Suarez: DOES HE BECOME, IN
EFFECT, PATIENT 0?
THE GUY WHO KICKS OFF THE
WORRIES INTO REPETITIVE BRAIN
TRAUMA IN THE N.F.L.?
>> HE IS PATIENT 0 INi MANY WA.
I MEAN, HIS CASE -- YOU KNOW, HE
ENDS UP AT THE ALLEGHENY COUNTY
CORONER'S OFFICE ON THE SLAB AND
THE DOCTOR AT THE TIME, THE
PATHOLOGIST WAS A JUNIOR
NEUROPATHOLOGIST WHO IS A
FASCINATING CHARACTER IN THE
BOOK AND THE FILM, A NIGERIAN
DOCTOR WHO KNOWS NOTHING ABOUT
FOOTBALL BUT HAS BEEN STUDYING
NEUROPATHOLOGY, HAS LEARNED
ABOUT MIKE WEBSTER'S PASSING AND
HIS DESCENT INTO MADNESS, IF YOU
WILL, AND HE DECIDES TO STUDY
WEBSTER'S BRAIN ANDi IT'S THIS
DECISION BACK IN 2002 AFTER
WEBSTER DIES THAT REALLY SETS
OFF THE N.F.L.'S CONCUSSION
CRISIS BECAUSE WHAT HE DISCOVERS
IN WEBSTER'S BRAIN IS THATi HES
BEEN SUFFERING FROM A
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE THAT
COMES TO BE KNOWN AS C.T.E., A
DISEASE KNOWN IN BOXERS BUT
NEVER IDENTIFIED IN A FOOTBALL-
>> Suarez: WELL, THERE HAVE BEEN
MANY CASES SINCE MARK WEBSTER.
HAS IT BEEN MEDICALLY
ESTABLISHED BEYOND A DOUBT THAT
PLAYING PRO-FOOTBALL EXPOSES THE
BODY TO INJURY THAT ENDS IN
NEUROLOGICAL DAMAGE AND OFTEN
DEATH?
>> IT'S A VERY GOOD QUESTION AND
ONE THAT THE SCIENTISTS CONTINUE
TO DEBATE, ALTHOUGi I THINK, YU
KNOW, IT'S FAIRLY WELL
ESTABLISHED AT THIS POINT THAT
YOU HAVE A NUMBER OF INDEPENDENT
SCIENTISTS SEPARATE FROM N.F.L.
DOCTORS WHO HAVE BEEN SAYING FOR
YEARS THAT THERE ARE CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN REPETITIVE BRAIN TRAUMA,
REPETITIVE TRAUMA FROM FOOTBALL
AND GET IT IS -- THE POSSIBILITY
OF GETTING LONG-TERM BRAIN
DAMAGE AND FOR TWO DECADES THIS
IS WHAT WE LAY OUT IN THE BOOK
AND THE FILM.
THE N.F.L. SEEMED TO BLANCH AT
THAT SCIENCE AND FIGHT BACK
AGAINST IT AND ATTACK THOSE
NEUROSCIENTISTS WHO WERE TELLING
THEM THAT THIS WAS AN ISSUE THEY
NEEDED TO BE DEALING WITH.
>> Brown:.
>> Suarez: YOU ASK YOURSELF IN
THE DOCUMENTARY "WHAT DID THE
N.F.L. KNOW AND WHEN DID IT KNOW
IT?"
HOW DO YOU ANSWER THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK AS I WAS SAYING
YOU KNOW, IT BECOMES CLEAR THAT
OVER A PERIOD OF TIME BEGINNING
IN THE MID-'90s AND PRUDENT
PERSON UNTIL 2009 YOU HAVE A
HEAVY LAYER
LEAGUE BEGINS TO HEAR FROM AT
LEAST A DOZEN, AS MANY AS A
DOZEN NEUROSCIENTIST US THERE
SURVEYS, THROUGH THE STUDY OF
BRAINS THROUGHi COMMENTARY THIS
IDEA THAT REPETITIVE TRAUMA IS
CONNECTED TO LONG-TERM BRAIN
DAMAGE IN FOOTBALL PLAYERS AND
WHAT THE LEAGUE HEARS THIS AND
IT HAS A TWO-PRONG ATTACK.
IT ATTACKS THE SCIENTISTS WHO
SUGGEST THIS IS A GROWING
PROBLEM, IT TRIES TO DISCOURAGE
THEM EFFECTIVELY OR RIP INTO
THEM IN VARIOUS WAYSS AND AT THD
SAME TIME THEY CREATE THEIR OWN
RESEARCH BODY WHICH MUTTS OUT A
SERIES OF PAPERS IN A
NEUROSURGERY JOURNAL ED TED BY A
CONSULTANT TO THE NEW YORK
GIANTS AND THAT -- THOSE PAPERS
BASICALLY SEND A MESSAGE THAT
CONCUSSIONS ARE NOT A PROBLEM IN
THE N.F.L. AND THAT ALMOST
N.F.L. PLAYERS ARE IMPERVIOUS TO
THESE KIND OF ISSUES.
>> Suarez: IN THE YEARS SINCE,
THE N.F.L. HAS MADE A MASSIVE
PAYMENT TO A CLASS OF INJURED
PLAYERS, CHANGED THE RULES IN
PRACTICE, TAKEN A LOOK AT THE
EQUIPMENT AND SAYS IT'S TRYING
TO DEALLE WITH THIS PROBLEM.
HAS IT DONE ENOUGH?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S THE
LINGERING QUESTION, CLEARLY.
I MEAN, ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
THE EXPERTS AT BOSTON UNIVERSITY
WHO ARE THE LEADING SCIENTISTS
IN THIS ARE SAYING IS THAT THE
ISSUE WITH FOOTBALL IS NOT
NECESSARILY THESE BIG HIT WES
SEE ALL THE TIME SHOWN ON
HIGHLIGHT BUS RATHER THE
REPETITIVE NATURE OF PLAYING THE
GAME.
THE BLOWS THAT HAS BEEN, THE
SUBCONCUSSIVE BLOWS THAT HAPPEN
EVERYDAY AT THE LINE OF
SCRIMMAGE AND WHETHER YOU CAN
MITIGATE THOSE OUT OF THE GAME
REMAINS TO BE SEEN AND WHETHER
YOU WANT TO FRANKLY REMAINS TO
BE SEEN.
IT'S A BRUTAL, VIOLENT SPORT BUT
VERY POPULAR, OBVIOUSLY.
I LOVE IT, MY BROTHER WHO
CO-AUTHORED THEr BOOK WITH ME,
WITH WE BOTH LOVE THE SPORT AND
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE LOVE IT.
THE QUESTION IS HOW INFORMED
PEOPLE ARE IN BEING ABLE TO MAKE
THE DECISIONS MOVING FORWARD
ABOUT WHAT THEY WANT FOOTBALL TO
BE.
IF.
>> Suarez: "LEAGUE OF DENIAL."
MARK FAINARU-WADAN WAD, THANKS
FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Woodruff: "FRONTLINE'S"
"LEAGUE OF DENIAL" AIRS TONIGHT
ON MOST PBS STATIONS.
AGAIN, THE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS OF
THE DAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA DECLARED HE'S
WILLING TO NEGOTIATE ON CHANGES
IN THE HEALTH CARE LAW AND
FEDERAL SPENDING AFTER
REPUBLICANS AGREE TO REOPEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND RAISE THE DEBT
CEILING.
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER SHOT
BACK THAT THE PRESIDENT IS
DEMANDING "UNCONDITIONAL
SURRENDER."
AND THE SUPREME COURT TOOK UP A
MAJOR CASE ON HOW MUCH
INDIVIDUALS MAY GIVE TO
POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS.
ONLINE, THEY'RE UNDER THREAT BY
WAR, THE ENVIRONMENT, AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, 67 SITES
ON THE 2014 WORLD MONUMENT
WATCH, JUST RELEASED TODAY.
JEFFREY BROWN SPOKE TO BONNIE
BURNHAM, PRESIDENT OF THE WORLD
MONUMENTS FUND, THE NONPROFIT
THAT ISSUES THE ANNUAL LIST.
WATCH THAT INTERVIEW ON OUR
HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, RAY SUAREZ REPORTS
ON RECENT SETBACKS TO
IMMIGRATION REFORM.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.